<META>::=<title>::="Moving my Website to Go"
<META>::=<date>::="September 7, 2016"
# Go-ing Home, Part 0
---
As is my wont, I decided to start learning a new programming language last month. After experimenting with various options, I decided on [Go](http://www.golang.org), a new-ish-comer to the scene brought to you by the fine folks at Google. It's quite enjoyable to write, has excellent tooling, and is supported by [Heroku](http://www.heroku.com), my go-to hobbyist web app platform, so I decided to redo my little website in it.

I'd previously been using [Flask](http://flask.pocoo.org), a python web app framework that does as little (or as much) as you ask it to. I've been working with it for several years now, but it's always good to expand one's toolkit, and I'd been meaning to look outside the high(est)-level langauges anyway.

Enter Go.

Go has good native HTTP libraries and great concurrency support, so it's a natural fit for a web app, and is particularly well-suited for microframeworks like I made for this one. [The code](https://github.com/thearchduke/gohome) is on Github.

I decided to redo this site with just the native libraries, which doesn't include database bindings, so... there's no database. This means there's some fun bootstrapping code that happens when the server loads in order to render the blog. Figuring that part out was probably the most fun.

I guess right now I just want to take a look at some of the things I liked.

----

###They say that one of the reasons Go was made is for little web apps, and it shows.
This whole thing is only about 300 lines of code. It could easily be shorter, if Go would let me do that.

There's another thing I like--Go has standard formatting through the gofmt tool. There's a correct way to format Go. Your code might compile if you've got it formatted wrong, but it's still formatted objectively *wrongly*. You can't argue about how to format it. There's a style guide, and it's draconian. (If you hadn't guessed, I find arguing about code formatting to be a silly pursuit. This gets rid of that.)

So you've got the sort of format that you'll see some places like the last two lines here:
<pre>func DoSomething() {<br/>	foo := nil<br/>	if foo != true {<br/>		fmt.Println("zed's dead, baby")<br/>	}<br/>}</pre>

So that and whitespace accounts for probably ~20% of the code here. And it compiles down to about a `10MB` executable. The slug on Heroku is about `6MB`. By way of comparison, this same site on Flask + MongoEngine has a Heroku slug of `87.5MB`. I'm sure that the size would be a lot smaller (but not nealry as small) if I'd written everything from scratch in vanilla python, but that would be a big pain in the butt. The standard Go libraries have what I need--heritable templates, great built-in regex parsing, straightforward routing from a URL to a function, and static file handling. What it *doesn't* have is a database interface, though I sincerely doubt that would increase the code size by a factor of ten.

Oh, and of course it's a lot zippier.

----

### I'll just start from the top I guess, for the rest of this.
I'm going to walk through my code, partly in case anybody stumbles on this who's looking for an example, but mostly because that's the best way to make sure I know it myself.

Here's the section dealing with config:
<pre>type Config struct {<br/>	TemplateDir string<br/>	BlogDir     string<br/>	Port        string<br/>	Mail        map[string]string<br/>	BasicAuth   map[string]string<br/>}<br/><br/>func loadConfig(fname string, cf *Config) {<br/>	body, err := ioutil.ReadFile(fname)<br/>	if err != nil {<br/>		panic("Could not locate/read config file")<br/>	}<br/>	err = json.Unmarshal(body, cf)<br/>	if err != nil {<br/>		panic("Could not parse config into Config struct")<br/>	}<br/>}</pre>

You pass this a pointer to a Config object and it tries to populate it with the contents of `fname`. Any zero-depth fields with names like the ones listed in the `struct` will be parsed into the object, and anything that doesn't match is ignored. Go accounts automatically for caplitalization in json.Unmarshal, by the way. So the field templatedir in the json would still map to TemplateDir in the `struct`, although it prefers exact matches so in 
<pre>{<br/>"TemplateDir":<br/>	"mytemplates",<br/>"templatedir":<br/>	"histemplates"<br/>}</pre>
`TemplateDir` would win. [The whole spec for Unmarshal](https://golang.org/pkg/encoding/json/#Unmarshal) is worth reading, actually.

---
### Web pages
Here's the part that deals with web pages:
<pre>type WebPage struct {<br/>	Urls      *map[string]string<br/>	BlogPost  template.HTML<br/>	BlogIndex *[]map[string]string<br/>	Message   string<br/>	Title     string<br/>	Date      string<br/>	Previous  map[string]string<br/>	Next      map[string]string<br/>}<br/><br/>func NewWebPage(msg string) *WebPage {<br/>	return &WebPage{<br/>		Urls:    &appUrls,<br/>		Message: msg,<br/>	}<br/>}<br/></pre>

The WebPage struct is something specifically designed for templates; they're only created within the context of a call to renderTemplate, a function we'll look at later. 

There's a few features from larger web app frameworks that I've tried to implement here. Let's start at the top, with that `Urls` field in WebPage. This is also dealt with elsewhere in the Go code as the `appUrals` variable; in WebPage it's just called `Urls`. This is the only universal part of every web page, which you can see in the func `NewWebPage`, and it's actually just a pointer to `appUrls`. `appUrls` is defined later, but it's a `map[string]string` like

<pre>{<br/>"blog": "/blog/",<br/>"static": "/static/",<br/>"staticRoot": "./static"<br/>}</pre>

and it lets me keep the URLs straight. So it's being used like `url_for` in Flask. By passing it to every new `WebPage` through the `NewWebPage` constructor-like function, I can use it in templates as e.g. `{{ .Urls.static }}`, also like `url_for`. This doesn't let me pass parameters, but you can do something like `{{ .Urls.thingWithParams }}?{{ k1 }}={{ v1 }}&{{ k2 }}={{ v2 }}`. There *are* ways to put functions in templates in Go, but I haven't had a chance to dig into them.

As an aside, there's a few different ways to make new objects in Go. I use the constructor literal here, which is `StructName{Field:Value, ...}`. When you want default field values, wrapping a `NewStructName` func around this is (in my understanding) the idomatic way to do it. There's no 'built-in' way like the `__init__` constructor in python, and it ends up looking more like `new` in Java or javascript but again those are built-in language features.

There's also the `Message` field, which is an implementation of Flask's `flash`. Since `NewWebPage` is used in calls to `renderTemplate`, I can include any messages I want to send that are *only for that single rendering of the web page* in the function, like `NewWebPage("this is a message")`. Since there are no optional function parameters, this means that you have to call `NewWebPage("")` with the null string for a page with no `Message`, but them's the breaks. (This shouldn't actually change the efficiency of the code at all, since every `WebPage` has null values for each non-specified field *anyway*.)

I suppose I could have a file-wide variable that pointed at the null string and do
<pre>if msg == "" {<br/>	msg = &nullString<br/>}</pre>
if I really wanted to. But I'm not writing something high-performance, and since Go has garbage collection these `WebPage`s are trashed as soon as they're rendered anyway.

In the template, this is handled by
<pre>{{ if .Message }}<br/>	{{ .Message }}<br/>{{ end }}</pre>
----

That's probably good enough for now, but I'll write more soon!